Knee cap(Patello-Femoral) replacement
	This kind of knee replacement is performed only for those people who have patello-femoral (knee-cap) arthritis. Only a small group of people will be eligible for this kind of replacement. The results of this kind of replacement have traditionally been very poor. Newer implants on the market show better results, but follow-up is still limited to only a couple of years at best.
	Unfortunately, this kind of arthritis is very difficult to treat especially in the younger patient and Nigel will try all other forms of treatment and therapy before embarking on a discussion of knee-cap replacement, as it is seen as almost a last resort operation or treatment.

Cause
	Patellofemoral Arthritis or knee cap arthritis causes pain and decreased mobility that is usually localized to the front of the knee joint. The patellofemoral compartment is involved in activities such as walking up and down hills or stairs, kneeling or squatting and standing back up. These activities can be become almost impossible to do when the pain from the arthritic damage is severe enough. Patients with this type of arthritis usually have minimal pain when walking on flat surfaces even when walking long distances.

Candidates for surgery
	If you have any of the following characteristics, you may not be a good candidate for the procedure:
	Knee stiffness
	Ligament damage
	Poor patellar (kneecap) tracking
	Major deformity of the leg
	Inflammatory arthritis (such as rheumatoid arthritis)
	Crystalline arthritis (such as gout)
	Morbid obesity
Surgical Procedure
	Inspection of the joint. Your surgeon will make an incision at the front of your knee. He or she will explore the three compartments of your knee, verifying that the damaged cartilage is, in fact, located only between the patella and the femur and that your ligaments are intact.
	If your surgeon finds damaged cartilage outside of the patellofemoral compartment, he or she may instead perform a total knee replacement. This contingency plan will have been discussed with you before your operation to make sure that you agree with this strategy.
	Patellofemoral replacement. There are two parts to the procedure:
	Prepare the bone. Your surgeon will use special tools to remove damaged cartilage and a small amount of bone from the patellofemoral compartment of your knee.
	Position the implants. A thin metal component is used to resurface the trochlear groove at the end of the femur. A plastic "button" or cover is used to resurface the backside of the patella. These parts are typically held to the bone with cement.

Recovery at Hospital
	A patient who has knee replacement surgery will be hospitalized for 1 to 3 days, depending on how well they follow and respond to rehabilitation.
	There will be pain, but a day after the procedure medical staff will encourage patients to get up and try to walk about, usually with some kind of walking aid. It is important to follow the instructions for rehabilitation.
	Physical therapy sessions aim to strengthen the knee. These may be painful, but they significantly reduce the risk of future complications.
	Patients who do not have help at home may need to stay in the hospital for longer.

Recovery at Home
	According to the American Association of Hip and Knee Surgeons (AAHKS), it can take up to 3 months to recover completely from a knee replacement surgical procedure.Patients can normally drive again after 4 to 6 weeks, and return to work after 6 to 8 weeks. Physical therapy may be provided for 3 months.Patients must comply with the instructions given by doctors, nurses and the physical therapist.
	The patient may be asked:
		Crutches may be needed during recovery.
		To take iron supplements to aid wound healing and muscle strength
		Not to bend down and lift heavy things, at least for the first few weeks
		Not to stay standing still for long periods, as the ankles might swell
		To use crutches, a walking stick, or a walker until the knee is strong enough to take your body weight
		To use all medications according to the instructions
		To carry out the recommended exercises to encourage proper mobility
		To keep the affected leg raised on a footstool when sitting
		To avoid soaking the wound until the scar is completely healed, because of the risk of infection
		To monitor for any signs and symptoms of infections, blood clots or pulmonary embolism
	Precautions should be taken to avoid a fall, as this might mean further surgery.

Cost of HIP knee replacement Abroad
	Below table compares the approximate cost of knee Replacement Surgery cost in India with various other countries in the world. However, this is a rough estimate and actual cost may vary from case to case	
	Procedure	                    USA ($)	Singapore($)	UK($)	India ($)
	Total Knee Replacement	        40000	10000	        13000	8500
	Knee replacement (unilateral)	32,000	25,000	        38,000	3,000
	Knee replacement (bilateral)	54,920	20,000	        56,000	5,100
	
