Minimally Invasive(MIS) Total Hip Replacement

	It is important to remember that minimally invasive joint replacement is a technique, not an implant. The technique allows your surgeon to lengthen the incision should it become necessary during surgery. Your surgeon will select the implant that they feel will best treat your specific condition.
	Today’s implants offer exceptional outcomes, but traditional surgical techniques require a long and involved physical recovery. Surgeons understand that patients desire to heal quickly so they can return to a more active and enjoyable lifestyle.
	Minimally invasive total hip replacement can be performed with either one or two small incisions. Smaller incisions allow for less tissue disturbance.
	Single-incision surgery. In this type of minimally invasive hip replacement, the surgeon makes a single incision that usually measures from 3 to 6 inches. The length of the incision depends on the size of the patient and the difficulty of the procedure.
		The incision is usually placed over the outside of the hip. The muscles and tendons are split or detached from the hip, but to a lesser extent than in traditional hip replacement surgery. They are routinely repaired after the surgeon places the implants. This encourages healing and helps prevent dislocation of the hip.
		Two-incision surgery. In this type of minimally invasive hip replacement, the surgeon makes two small incisions:
		A 2- to 3-inch incision over the groin for placement of the socket, and
		A 1- to 2-inch incision over the buttock for placement of the femoral stem.
		To perform the two-incision procedure, the surgeon may need guidance from x-rays. It may take longer to perform the two-incision surgery than it does to perform traditional hip replacement surgery.
		The hospital stay after minimally invasive surgery is similar in length to the stay after traditional hip replacement surgery--ranging from 1 to 4 days. Physical rehabilitation is a critical component of recovery. Your surgeon or a physical therapist will provide you with specific exercises to help increase your range of motion and restore your strength.

Goals of minimally invasive hip replacement surgery
	The goal of minimally invasive knee replacement surgery is to:
		Do less damage to the skin by making a smaller incision, typically 3 to 6 inches long, compared to a 10 to 12-inch incision used in traditional surgery. (Alternatively, a 2-incision minimally invasive hip replacement typically involves a 2 to 3-inch incision over the groin and a 1 to 2-inch incision over the buttock.)
		Leave a smaller scar.
		Do less damage to the joint’s surrounding muscles and other soft tissue.
		See Total Hip Replacement Surgery Risks and Complications
		Reduce the patient’s hospital stay to as few as 1 or 2 days, compared to 3 to 5 days for traditional surgery. In fact, outpatient surgery is now becoming common in select patients undergoing minimally invasive procedures.
		Enable a patient to rehabilitate faster, reducing the time they must stay in the hospital and accelerating physical therapy.

Candidates for MIS
		Minimally invasive total hip replacement is not suitable for all patients. Your doctor will conduct a comprehensive evaluation and consider several factors before determining if the procedure is an option for you.
		In general, candidates for minimal incision procedures are thinner, younger, healthier, and more motivated to participate in the rehabilitation process, compared with patients who undergo the traditional surgery.
		Minimally invasive techniques are less suitable for patients who are overweight or who have already undergone other hip surgeries. In addition, patients who have a significant deformity of the hip joint, those who are very muscular, and those with health problems that may slow wound healing may be at a higher risk for problems from minimally invasive total hip replacement.

Recovery
		After surgery, you probably will be hospitalized for 2 to 3 days. During this time, you will receive pain medication and begin physical therapy for your hip. It is important to start moving your new hip as soon as possible after surgery to promote blood flow, to regain hip motion, and to facilitate the recovery process. You should be out of bed and walking with crutches or a walker within 24 hours of your surgery.
		Before you leave the hospital, your therapist will show you a variety of exercises designed to help you regain mobility and strength in your hip. You should be able to perform these exercises on your own at home. You will be shown how to safely climb and descend stairs, how to get into and out of a seated position, and how to care for your hip once you return home.

Rehabilitation
	At home, it is important to continue with your exercises as your physician has instructed. It is a good idea to enlist the help of friends or family to help you once you do return home
	Recovery after minimally invasive hip replacement takes approximately half as long as traditional total hip replacement. Every person’s recovery time will vary, but most people should be able to drive after 2 weeks, garden after 3 to 4 weeks, and golf about 6 to 8 weeks after surgery. Your surgeon will tell you when you can return to these activities and will also tell you which activities to avoid.
	You will typically not be allowed to participate in high-impact activities or contact sports. These types of activities place extreme pressure on the hip joint, which could lead to complications.

Cost of HIP surgery Abroad
	Below table compares the approximate cost of Hip Replacement Surgery cost in India with various other countries in the world. However, this is a rough estimate and actual cost may vary from case to case	
Country	Hip Replacement Surgery Cost
India	    7,000 $
USA	        57,000 $
Singapore	14,000 $
UAE	        16,000 $
Malaysia	12,800 $
Thailand	12,000 $

