Minimally Invasive(MIS) Total Knee Replacement
	Minimally-invasive quadriceps-sparing total knee replacement is a new surgical technique that allows surgeons to insert the same time-tested reliable knee replacement implants through a shorter incision using surgical approach that avoids trauma to the quadriceps muscle (see figure 1) which is the most important muscle group around the knee. This new technique which is sometimes called quadriceps-sparing knee replacement uses an incision that is typically only 3-4” in length (see figure 2) and the recovery time is much quicker – often permitting patients to walk with a cane within a couple of weeks of surgery or even earlier. The less-traumatic nature of the surgical approach also may decrease post-operative pain and diminish the need for rehab and therapy compared to more traditional approaches.
	The main potential benefits of this new technique include:
		More rapid return of knee function
		Smaller incision
		Decreased post-operative pain
		Same reliable surgical implants as Traditional Knee Replacement.

Candidates for Surgery
	Joint replacement surgery is considered when:

	•	the arthritis is a major problem for the patient
	•	the patient is sufficiently healthy to undergo the procedure
	•	the patient understands and accepts the risks and alternatives
	•	there is sufficient bone and tendon to permit the surgery and
	•	the surgeon is experienced in knee replacement surgery.

Surgical Procedures
	Minimally-invasive quadriceps-sparing total knee replacement surgery begins by performing a sterile preparation of the skin over the knee to prevent infection followed by inflation of a tourniquet to prevent blood loss during the operation.
	Next a well-positioned skin incision – typically about 4” in length though this varies with the patient’s size – is made down the front of the knee just adjacent to the kneecap and the knee joint is inspected and preliminary ligament balancing is performed.
	Next specially-designed alignment rods and cutting jigs – which are smaller and easier to pass through the smaller incision than those used for traditional total knee replacement – are used to remove enough bone from the end of the femur (thigh bone) the top of the tibia (shin bone) and the underside of the patella (kneecap) to allow placement of the joint replacement implants. Proper sizing and alignment of the implants as well as final balancing of the knee ligaments all are critical for normal post-operative function and good pain relief. Again these steps are complex and considerable experience in minimally-invasive knee replacement is required in order to make sure they are done reliably case after case. Provisional (trial) implant components are placed without bone cement to make sure they fit well against the bones and are well aligned; at this time good function--including full flexion (bend) extension (straightening) and ligament balance--is verified.
	Finally, the bone is cleaned using saline solution and the joint replacement components are cemented into place using polymethylmethacrylate bone cement The surgical incision is closed using stitches and staples.

Recovery in hospital
	The average hospital stay after traditional total knee replacement is three days and most patients spend several more days in an inpatient rehabilitation facility. Patients who prefer not to have inpatient rehabilitation may spend an extra day or two in the hospital before discharge to home.
	The overall duration of hospitalization after minimally-invasive quadriceps-sparing total knee replacement typically is 48 hours; some patients need to stay for a third day but many do not. Patients generally are discharged directly home from the hospital after minimally-invasive quadriceps-sparing total knee replacement and don't require any inpatient rehabilitation. Ultimately the length of hospital stay is individualized to meet each patient’s needs and discharge occurs when the patient can perform the necessary range of motion exercises and when home support systems for the patient are in place.
	Patients begin range-of-motion exercises on the day following surgery. Patients are encouraged to sit stand and walk as much as possible in the days following the procedure. Patients who regain good range-of-motion early (defined as near-full extension and bend beyond 90 degrees in the first day or two after surgery) typically do very well so this is emphasized in physical therapy sessions that take place twice daily after surgery. Most patients begin with a walker or crutches and transition to a cane is encouraged and permitted as soon as patients tolerate it provided their balance is good. Therapists instruct all patients in how to perform a home exercise program to allow recovery to continue after discharge.

Rehabilitation at Home
	All patients are given a set of home exercises to do between supervised physical therapy sessions and the home exercises make up an important part of the recovery process. However supervised therapy--which is best done in an outpatient physical therapy studio--is extremely helpful and those patients who are able to attend outpatient therapy are encouraged to do so.Once the range of motion and strength goals are achieved the exercise program can be cut back to a minimal level. But maintaining lifelong fitness should be everyone’s goal!
	Most patients are walking unassisted following this procedure by about a two weeks after surgery (see video).
	Most patients can return to desk work at least for part days by about a three weeks after surgery.

Cost of knee replacement Abroad
	Below table compares the approximate cost of knee Replacement Surgery cost in India with various other countries in the world. However, this is a rough estimate and actual cost may vary from case to case	
	Procedure						USA ($)	Singapore($)	UK($)	India ($)
	Total Knee Replacement			40000	10000			13000	8500
	Knee replacement (unilateral)	32,000	25,000			38,000	3,000
	Knee replacement (bilateral)	54,920	20,000			56,000	5,100

