Total Hip Replacement
	In a total hip replacement (also called total hip arthroplasty), the damaged bone and cartilage is removed and replaced with prosthetic components.
	The damaged femoral head is removed and replaced with a metal stem that is placed into the hollow center of the femur. The femoral stem may be either cemented or "press fit" into the bone.
	A metal or ceramic ball is placed on the upper part of the stem. This ball replaces the damaged femoral head that was removed.
	The damaged cartilage surface of the socket (acetabulum) is removed and replaced with a metal socket. Screws or cement are sometimes used to hold the socket in place.
	A plastic, ceramic, or metal spacer is inserted between the new ball and the socket to allow for a smooth gliding surface.

Candidates for Surgery
	There are no absolute age or weight restrictions for total hip replacements.
	Recommendations for surgery are based on a patient's pain and disability, not age. Most patients who undergo total hip replacement are age 50 to 80, but orthopedic surgeons evaluate patients individually. Total hip replacements have been performed successfully at all ages, from the young teenager with juvenile arthritis to the elderly patient with degenerative arthritis.
	
When Surgery Is Recommended
	There are several reasons why your doctor may recommend hip replacement surgery. People who benefit from hip replacement surgery often have:

	•	Hip pain that limits everyday activities, such as walking or bending
	•	Hip pain that continues while resting, either day or night
	•	Stiffness in a hip that limits the ability to move or lift the leg
	•	Inadequate pain relief from anti-inflammatory drugs, physical therapy, or walking supports
	
The Orthopedic Evaluation
  An evaluation with an orthopedic surgeon consists of several components.
	a)	Medical history. 
	Your orthopedic surgeon will gather information about your general health and ask questions about the extent of your hip pain and how it affects your ability to perform everyday activities. 
	b)	Physical examination. 
			This will assess hip mobility, strength, and alignment.
	c)	X-rays. 
			These images help to determine the extent of damage or deformity in your hip.
	d)	 Other tests. Occasionally other tests, such as a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, may be needed to determine the condition of the bone and soft tissues of your hip.
	
Expectations from surgery
	An important factor in deciding whether to have hip replacement surgery is understanding what the procedure can and cannot do. Most people who undergo hip replacement surgery experience a dramatic reduction of hip pain and a significant improvement in their ability to perform the common activities of daily living.
	With normal use and activity, the material between the head and the socket of every hip replacement implant begins to wear. Excessive activity or being overweight may speed up this normal wear and cause the hip replacement to loosen and become painful. Therefore, most surgeons advise against high-impact activities such as running, jogging, jumping, or other high-impact sports.
	Realistic activities following total hip replacement include unlimited walking, swimming, golf, driving, hiking, biking, dancing, and other low-impact sports.
	With appropriate activity modification, hip replacements can last for many years.
	
Surgery details
	Anesthesia
		After admission, you will be evaluated by a member of the anesthesia team. The most common types of anesthesia are general anesthesia (you are put to sleep) or spinal, epidural, or regional nerve block anesthesia (you are awake but your body is numb from the waist down). The anesthesia team, with your input, will determine which type of anesthesia will be best for you.
	Implant Components
		Many different types of designs and materials are currently used in artificial hip joints. All of them consist of two basic components: the ball component (made of highly polished strong metal or ceramic material) and the socket component (a durable cup of plastic, ceramic or metal, which may have an outer metal shell).
		The prosthetic components may be "press fit" into the bone to allow your bone to grow onto the components or they may be cemented into place. The decision to press fit or to cement the components is based on a number of factors, such as the quality and strength of your bone. A combination of a cemented stem and a non-cemented socket may also be used.
		Your orthopedic surgeon will choose the type of prosthesis that best meets your needs.
	Procedure
		The surgical procedure takes a few hours. Your orthopedic surgeon will remove the damaged cartilage and bone and then position new metal, plastic, or ceramic implants to restore the alignment and function of your hip.
		After surgery, you will be moved to the recovery room where you will remain for several hours while your recovery from anesthesia is monitored. After you wake up, you will be taken to your hospital room.
	Your Stay in the Hospital
		You will most likely stay in the hospital for a few days. To protect your hip during early recovery, a positioning splint, such as a foam pillow placed between your legs, may be used.
	Pain Management
		After surgery, you will feel some pain. This is a natural part of the healing process. Your doctor and nurses will work to reduce your pain, which can help you recover from surgery faster.
		Medications are often prescribed for short-term pain relief after surgery. Many types of medicines are available to help manage pain, including opioids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and local anesthetics. Your doctor may use a combination of these medications to improve pain relief, as well as minimize the need for opioids.
		Be aware that although opioids help relieve pain after surgery, they are a narcotic and can be addictive. Opioid dependency and overdose has become a critical public health issue in the U.S. It is important to use opioids only as directed by your doctor. As soon as your pain begins to improve, stop taking opioids. Talk to your doctor if your pain has not begun to improve within a few days of your surgery.
	Physical Therapy
		Walking and light activity are important to your recovery. Most patients who undergo total hip replacement begin standing and walking with the help of a walking support and a physical therapist the day after surgery. In some cases, patients begin standing and walking on the actual day of surgery. The physical therapist will teach you specific exercises to strengthen your hip and restore movement for walking and other normal daily activities.
	Preventing Pneumonia
		It is common for patients to have shallow breathing in the early postoperative period. This is usually due to the effects of anesthesia, pain medications, and increased time spent in bed. This shallow breathing can lead to a partial collapse of the lungs (termed "atelectasis") which can make patients susceptible to pneumonia. To help prevent this, it is important to take frequent deep breaths. Your nurse may provide a simple breathing apparatus called a spirometer to encourage you to take deep breaths.
Recovery
	The success of your surgery will depend in large measure on how well you follow your orthopedic surgeon's instructions regarding home care during the first few weeks after surgery.
	Wound Care
		You may have stitches or staples running along your wound or a suture beneath your skin. The stitches or staples will be removed approximately 2 weeks after surgery.Avoid getting the wound wet until it has thoroughly sealed and dried. You may continue to bandage the wound to prevent irritation from clothing or support stockings.
	Diet
		Some loss of appetite is common for several weeks after surgery. A balanced diet, often with an iron supplement, is important to promote proper tissue healing and restore muscle strength. Be sure to drink plenty of fluids.
	Activity
		Exercise is a critical component of home care, particularly during the first few weeks after surgery. You should be able to resume most normal light activities of daily living within 3 to 6 weeks following surgery. Some discomfort with activity and at night is common for several weeks.
Outcomes
	Your New Hip Is Different?
		You may feel some numbness in the skin around your incision. You also may feel some stiffness, particularly with excessive bending. These differences often diminish with time, and most patients find these are minor compared with the pain and limited function they experienced prior to surgery.
		Your new hip may activate metal detectors required for security in airports and some buildings. Tell the security agent about your hip replacement if the alarm is activated. You may ask your orthopedic surgeon for a card confirming that you have an artificial hip.

Protecting Your Hip Replacement
		There are many things you can do to protect your hip replacement and extend the life of your hip implant.
		Participate in a regular light exercise program to maintain proper strength and mobility of your new hip.
		Take special precautions to avoid falls and injuries. If you break a bone in your leg, you may require more surgery.
		Make sure your dentist knows that you have a hip replacement. Talk with your orthopedic surgeon about whether you need to take antibiotics prior to dental procedures.
		See your orthopedic surgeon periodically for routine follow-up examinations and x-rays, even if your hip replacement seems to be doing fine.
		
Cost of HIP replacement
	Below table compares the approximate cost of Hip Replacement Surgery cost in India with various other countries in the world. However, this is a rough estimate and actual cost may vary from case to case	
Country	Hip Replacement Surgery Cost

India		7,000 $
USA			57,000 $
Singapore	14,000 $
UAE			16,000 $
Malaysia	12,800 $
Thailand	12,000 $

